---
layout: post
title: Week 1 at RC
categories: []
tags: [RC]
comments: true
---

<script src = "http://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js"></script>

##d3 funtimez

<div id="example"></div>
<script>


		var dataArray = [];

	for (var i=0, t=50; i<t; i++) {
    		dataArray.push(Math.round(Math.random() * t))
		};
		
		var height = 300;

		var barWidth = 10

		var width = dataArray.length * (barWidth + 10);

		

		var canvas = d3.select("div#example")
						.append("svg")
						 
						.attr("width", width + 50)
						.attr("height", height + 50)
						.append("g")												//this groups all the SVG elements
						.attr("transform", "translate(0,300)"); 					//if you're using this, remember this is not independent from 											
						

		var heightScale = 	d3.scale.linear()
							.domain([0, Math.max.apply(Math, dataArray)]) 		// continuous input domain; scales according to the max value
							.range([0, height ]);									// continuous output range


		var colorScale = d3.scale.linear()
							.domain([0, dataArray.length]) 
							.range(["red","blue"]);

		var myMouseoverFunction = function() {
				var rectangle_col = d3.select(this);
				rectangle_col.transition()
				.duration(500)
				.attr("fill", "purple")
				.attr("height", rectangle_col.attr("height")*1 - 10);
			}

		var bars = canvas.selectAll("rect")
							.data(dataArray)
							.enter()
								.append("rect")
								.attr("height", 0)
								.attr("width", barWidth)
								.attr("x", function(d,i){ return i*(-barWidth-5); })
								
								.attr("transform", "rotate(180)")
								.on("mouseover", myMouseoverFunction)
								.attr("fill", function(d,i){return colorScale(i)	} )
									.transition()
									.duration(500)
									.attr("height", function(d){ return heightScale(d);});
									

									
								

		
	</script>


During my first week at RC I've been getting to grips with [d3.js](http://d3js.org/), the javascript library for data visualisation. Almost everything about javascript and d3 is new to me, but I've decided that making pretty things that execute in your browser is FUN. A great resource for learning d3 is the book [Interactive Data Visualization](http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000345/), which is available for free online. 

In the visualisation above, I've generated some random numbers between 0 and 100 and stuck them in an array. The heights of the bars are proportional to the size of the numbers in the array; in d3 this is achieved using a technique called *binding*, which is essentially a way of mapping data to visuals. Then I applied some *transitions*; this is where some action, like a colour change or a movement, is applied smoothly over time. There are three transitions here:

1. The bars grow to their initial height at the start
2. The colours transition to purple when you hover your mouse over them
3. The bars shrink when you hover over them

Finally, I've used a linear colour scale to colour the bars from red to blue horizontally from left to right. Obviously this chart isn't very useful right now, but pretty soon I'll be applying what I've learned to some real data. Code for this visualisation is available [here](https://github.com/linbug/d3/blob/master/d3lecture4.html).

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Week 1 at RC

In truth, I put that d3 animation at the top because I couldn't figure out how to initialise it when you scroll to it :p. I meant to start this post with: how is RC going? In a sentence, I'd say:

"It's a bit overwhelming but I'm learning a lot, and it's a lot of fun!"

In list form, I'd say I've achieved these things:

- learned about classes in Python by pairing with Shad on a text-based [game](https://github.com/linbug/dragold) (we didn't finish it but we learned stuff)
- learned that [pudb](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pudb) is a good Python debugger, and that I want to try it out
- finally got [Glock](https://github.com/linbug/Glock) working on my computer, so now I can track my activities at RC
- got [jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) (the blog platform I'm using) working on my computer (with help from Duncan) so that I can now preview posts on my computer before pushing them (this has made my blogging SO MUCH EASIER)
- learned about a whole lot of cool functionalities in my text editor [Sublime Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/) (thanks to Sher Minn), like git integration and jekyll templates
- got started with learning d3 (see above)
- went to Mary's intermediate git workshop, and later did my very first fast-forward merge (at least, the first where I knew what was going on)
- met a whole load of enthusiastic programmers, some of whom I lynch mobbed during One Night Ultimate Werewolf
- waited probably a cumulative 3 hours for subway trains

At the start I felt a bit lost and like I was scrabbling around trying to decide what to do. However, that seems to have abated a bit since I got started on something. What I really want is to come up with a bigger project idea that'll keep me busy for a few weeks. I also want to try and pair more, because I really enjoy working collaboratively on coding projects.

I'm excited for tomorrow and to get programming again. Bring on Week 2!

<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script type="text/javascript">
    /* * * CONFIGURATION VARIABLES * * */
    var disqus_shortname = 'linbug';
    
    /* * * DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE * * */
    (function() {
        var dsq = document.createElement('script'); dsq.type = 'text/javascript'; dsq.async = true;
        dsq.src = '//' + disqus_shortname + '.disqus.com/embed.js';
        (document.getElementsByTagName('head')[0] || document.getElementsByTagName('body')[0]).appendChild(dsq);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript" rel="nofollow">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>




	